---
title: "The SSLKEYLOGFILE Format for TLS"
abbrev: "SSLKEYLOGFILE"
category: info

docname: draft-thomson-tls-keylogfile-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Security"
workgroup: "Transport Layer Security"
keyword:
 - network transparency
 - tls
 - blockchain
venue:
  group: "Transport Layer Security"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "tls@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/tls/"
  github: "martinthomson/sslkeylogfile"
  latest: "https://martinthomson.github.io/sslkeylogfile/draft-thomson-tls-keylogfile.html"

author:
 -
    fullname: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: mt@lowentropy.net

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

A format that supports the logging information about the secrets used in a TLS
connection is described.  Recording secrets to a file in SSLKEYLOGFILE format
allows diagnostic and logging tools that use this file to decrypt messages
exchanged by TLS endpoints.


--- middle

# Introduction

Debugging or analyzing protocols can be challenging when TLS {{?TLS13}} is used
to protect the content of communications.  Inspecting the content of encrypted
messages in diagnostic tools can enable more thorough analysis.

Over time, multiple TLS implementations have informally adopted a file format
that logging the secret values generated by the TLS key schedule.  In many
implementations, the file that the secrets are logged to is specified in an
environment variable named "SSLKEYLOGFILE", hence the name of SSLKEYLOGFILE
format.  Note the use of "SSL" as this convention originally predates the
adoption of TLS as the name of the protocol.

This document describes the SSLKEYLOGFILE format.  This format can be used for
TLS 1.2 {{!TLS12=RFC5246}} and TLS 1.3 {{!TLS13=RFC8446}}.  The format also
supports earlier TLS versions, though use of earlier versions is strongly
discouraged {{?RFC8996}}.  This format can also be used with the corresponding
DTLS version {{?DTLS13=RFC9147}} and QUIC {{?RFC9000}}{{?RFC9001}}, which use
the TLS key schedule.


# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# The SSLKEYLOGFILE Format

A file in SSLKEYLOGFILE format is a text file.  This document specifies the
character encoding as UTF-8 {{!RFC3629}}.  Though the format itself only
includes ASCII characters {{?RFC0020}}, comments MAY contain other characters.
Though Unicode is permitted in comments, the file MUST NOT contain a unicode
byte order mark (U+FEFF).

Lines are terminated using the line ending convention of the platform on which
the file is generated.  Tools that process these files MUST accept CRLF (U+13
followed by U+10), CR (U+13), or LF (U+10) as a line terminator.  Lines are
ignored if they are empty or if the first character is an octothorp character
('#', U+23).  Other lines of the file each contain a single secret.

Each secret is described using a single line composed of three values that are
separated by a single space character (U+20).  These values are:

label:

: The label identifies the type of secret that is being conveyed; see {{labels}}
  for a description of the labels that are defined in this document.

client_random:

: The 32 byte value of the Random field from the ClientHello message that
  established the TLS connection.  This value is encoded as 64 hexadecimal
  characters.  Including this field allows a single file to include secrets from
  multiple connections and for the secrets to be applied to the correct
  connection, though this depends on being able to match records to the correct
  ClientHello message.

secret:

: The value of the identified secret for the identified connection.  This value
  is encoded in hexadecimal, with a length that depends on the size of the
  secret.

For the hexadecimal values of the `client_random` or `secret`, no convention
exists for the case of characters 'a' through 'f' (or 'A' through 'F').  Files
can be generated with either, so either form MUST be accepted when processing a
file.

Diagnostic tools that accept files in this format might choose to ignore lines
that do not conform to this format in the interest of ensuring that secrets can
be obtained from corrupted files.


## Secret Labels for TLS 1.3 {#labels}

An implementation of TLS 1.3 produces a number of values as part of the key
schedule (see {{Section 7.1 of !TLS13}}).  Each of the following labels
correspond to the equivalent secret produced by the key schedule:

CLIENT_EARLY_TRAFFIC_SECRET:

: This secret is used to protect records sent by the client as early data, if
  early data is attempted by the client.  Note that a server that rejects early
  data will not log this secret, though a client that attempts early data can do
  so unconditionally.

EARLY_EXPORTER_MASTER_SECRET:

: This secret is used for early exporters.  Like the
  CLIENT_EARLY_TRAFFIC_SECRET, this is only generated when early data is
  attempted and might not be logged by a server if early data is rejected.

CLIENT_HANDSHAKE_TRAFFIC_SECRET:

: This secret is used to protect handshake records sent by the client.

SERVER_HANDSHAKE_TRAFFIC_SECRET:

: This secret is used to protect handshake records sent by the server.

CLIENT_TRAFFIC_SECRET_0:

: This secret is used to protect application_data records sent by the client
  immediately after the handshake completes.  This secret is identified as
  `client_application_traffic_secret_0` in the TLS 1.3 key schedule.

SERVER_TRAFFIC_SECRET_0:

: This secret is used to protect application_data records sent by the server
  immediately after the handshake completes.  This secret is identified as
  `server_application_traffic_secret_0` in the TLS 1.3 key schedule.

EXPORTER_SECRET:

: This secret is used in generating exporters {{Section 7.5 of !TLS13}}.
{: newline="true"}

Each of the preceding labels are identified using the lowercase form of the
label in {{!TLS13}}, except as noted.  Note that the order that labels appear
here corresponds to the order in which they are presented in {{?TLS13}}, but
there is no guarantee that implementations will log secrets strictly in this
order.

Key updates ({{Section 7.2 of !TLS13}}) result in new secrets being generated
for protecting `application_data` records.  The label used for these secrets
comprises a base label of "CLIENT_TRAFFIC_SECRET_" for a client or
"SERVER_TRAFFIC_SECRET_" for a server, plus the decimal value of a counter.
This counter identifies the number of key updates that occurred to produce this
secret.  This counter starts at 0, which produces the first application data
traffic secret, as above.


## Secret Labels for TLS 1.2

An implementation of TLS 1.2 {{!TLS12}} (and also earlier versions) use the
label "CLIENT_RANDOM" to identify the "master" secret for the connection.


# Security Considerations {#security}

Access to the content of a file in SSLKEYLOGFILE allows an attacker to break the
confidentiality protection on any TLS connections that are included in the file.
This includes both active connections and connections for which encrypted
records were previously stored.  Ensuring adequate access control on these files
therefore becomes very important.

Implementations that support logging this data need to ensure that logging can
only be enabled by those who are authorized.  Allowing logging to be initiated
by any entity that is not otherwise authorized to observe or modify the content
of connections for which secrets are logged could represent a privilege
escalation attack.  Implementations that enable logging also need to ensure that
access to logged secrets is limited, using appropriate file permissions or
equivalent access control mechanisms.

In order to support decryption, the secrets necessary to remove record
protection are logged.  However, as the keys that can be derived from these
secrets are symmetric, an adversary with access to these secrets is also able to
encrypt data for an active connection.  This might allow for injection or
modification of application data on a connection that would otherwise be
protected by TLS.

As some protocols that depend on TLS generate encryption keys, the SSLKEYLOGFILE
format includes keys that identify the secret used in TLS exporters or early
exporters ({{Section 7.5 of ?TLS13}}.  Knowledge of these secrets can enable
more than inspection or modification of encrypted data, depending on how an
application protocol uses exporters.  For instance, exporters might be used for
session bindings (e.g., {{?RFC8471}}), authentication (e.g., {{?RFC9261}}), or
other derived secrets that are used in application context.  An adversary that
obtains these secrets might be able to use this information to attack these
applications.  A TLS implementation might either choose to omit these secrets in
contexts where the information might be abused or to require separate
authorization to enable logging of exporter secrets.

Logging the TLS 1.2 "master" secret provides the recipient of a file in
SSLKEYLOGFILE far greater access to an active connection.  This can include the
ability to resume the connection and impersonate either endpoint, insert records
that result in renegotiation, or even forge Finished messages.  Implementations
might avoid these risks by not logging this secret value.


# IANA Considerations

The "`application/sslkeylogfile`" media type can be used to describe content in
the SSLKEYLOGFILE format.  IANA \[has added/is requested to add] the following
information to the "Media Types" registry at
<https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types>:

Type name:

: application

Subtype name:

: sslkeylogfile

Required parameters:

: N/A

Optional parameters:

: N/A

Encoding considerations:

: 8bit (Unicode without BOM or ASCII only)

Security considerations:

: See {{security}}.

Interoperability considerations:

: Line endings might differ from platform convention

Published specification:

: This document

Applications that use this media type:

: Diagnostic and analysis tools that need to decrypt data that is otherwise
  protected by TLS.

Fragment identifier considerations:

: N/A

Additional information:

: <dl spacing="compact">
  <dt>Deprecated alias names for this type:</dt><dd>N/A</dd>
  <dt>Magic number(s):</dt><dd>N/A</dd>
  <dt>File extension(s):</dt><dd>N/A</dd>
  <dt>Macintosh file type code(s):</dt><dd>N/A</dd>
  </dl>

Person & email address to contact for further information:

: See the Authors' Addresses section.

Intended usage:

: COMMON

Restrictions on usage:

: N/A

Author:

: See the Authors' Addresses section.

Change controller:

: IESG
{: spacing="compact"}


--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

The SSLKEYLOGFILE format originated in the NSS project, but it has evolved over
time as TLS has changed.  Many people contributed to this evolution.  The author
is only documenting the format as it is used.
